The first year, do you remember how many courses you taught and what they were?
I don't remember exactly.
Did you get to select the courses?
No.
No, I didn't ever select the courses.
Not then.
You just taught what the department had told you to teach.
And there was a sort of proprietary interest in certain courses, so that if a professor had staked out that area as his area, then you never rotated.
So that for the first years I was here, I never taught American diplomatic history because the man who taught it, Claude Hall, for whom I have the greatest respect.
And I never wanted to confront him.
I knew that he did it well.
And I did want to teach it.
There was no question about that.
But I never felt like it was worth confrontation, because I liked Claude so much.
And I knew he enjoyed teaching that course.
And I knew also that he did it well.
So it was just one of those things that where rather than make a scene over it, I just decided that these other courses I could teach and I enjoyed teaching them and they needed to be taught and they were areas where
there were other people who were not qualified.
And I was qualified to teach East Asian history, actually.
My professor was Paul Clyde at Duke, and that was his major area.
And I'd done a lot of work in it.
So I was perfectly happy to teach Russian history, which I expanded from one course
to three courses so that we had a year course in Russian history, two semesters, and then another semester in Soviet history.
Were you the first to teach Russian history here?
I think so.
If someone else taught Russian history, they weren't teaching it when I came.
Now, I know that Claude had taught the Far East before I came.
But when I came, then I began teaching the Far East.
And I expanded that course from the Far East into two semesters.
And then I expanded it to take in Asian civilizations, because I said that I felt very strongly about two things.
One was that we only taught Western civilization.
And I thought that was just so parochial at this time in history that our students had no exposure to Eastern civilizations and to other civilizations besides Western.
And so that's the first thing that I worked to do here.
And the second thing was to transform the East Asia into Asian civilizations
Because I think now about broadening an international university, we still have a long way to go on that, Haskell.
But I think that those were important steps that needed to be taken.
And frankly, it wasn't the first.
I did the same thing at Cal State Fullerton.
I had to help them see the importance of expanding from Western civilization to world civilization.
and also from just teaching the Far East to Asian civilizations.
So I was happy to do that, and I enjoyed my students.
And it was exciting because it was like you were opening up a whole new world to them that they had never been exposed to before.
And we did well in those courses at that time.
And I always worked in the department to try to expand our program to the Middle East, to Africa, so that we really were teaching in the international field.
And it was slow going.
It was really slow going, because there was such, and I mean, basically, I'm an American diplomatic historian.
But in American diplomatic history, you have to have fields in all of these other areas, which is one reason why it was possible for me to teach in these other fields, because you have to have that kind of an international background, and more so, of course, nowadays.
But in any case, sometimes there was sort of an opposition to any expansion, even into Europe, by the Americanists.
So it was not easy.
And we had to work hard at it.
We had to be patient.
We certainly did, I think, make progress.
I think now this department is the best history department in the state of Texas.
And I think if you look at the research record, if you look at the research record alone, it has come so far since the days when I first got here.
It's just amazing what we have been able to do.
So, now, you're speaking about the friendliness of the students.
I always have loved the students here.
They may be very narrow at times because they come from provincial backgrounds, a lot of them.
But they...
They're ready to learn.
And it's exciting to see the process of discovery.
And I teach so that I get to know the students.
I've always made it a practice to learn the students' names.
That's the first thing I do on the first day of class.
I get to know all their names.
I ask them to write down little notes about who they are and what they want to be when they grow up and all that kind of stuff, what they're really interested in.
And that way, and then I memorize those names and I attach them to the little pieces of paper that I get and I go in and students still are always just amazed because I know their names.
But I have learned how important that is.
I mean, a student will work so much harder for a professor when that professor knows who he or she is.
And it's always been that way.
So I've made that effort.
But the other thing I've always liked is I never got upset when the students walked across the campus and say, howdy.
I always thought that was great.
And I always tried to respond, although it was different.
It certainly wasn't hello.
It was always howdy.
And I think that's one of the things that has contributed to a sense of being a part of a big family.
You mentioned a while ago the plop of the tobacco chillers.
Do you remember any other learning experiences for you as a new faculty member?
Yes.
Chicken.
When you...
you would, now I can't remember what was the way they approved of it or disapproved of it.
Disapproved of it, anyway.
You might hear that from the back of the room.
Yes, or another thing was if they approved, they'd go whoop.
So if you said something that they really liked, you'd hear whoop, whoop, whoop, et cetera.
I'll tell you one of the times that really made me aware of this so-called Aggie spirit.
I think it was around, it must have been around 1978 or so.
I had been invited to go to Maxwell Air Force Base.
for a week-long seminar in world affairs.
Now, at Maxwell Air Force Base, they have a program for officers who are going to be promoted ultimately to general.
You know, colonels, light colonels, et cetera.
And they had the six-week program that they had to go through at Maxwell Air Force Base.
And then at the end of the six weeks, they had this sort of graduation week when they would invite experts in world affairs to come and lead these seminars for a week and various issues in world affairs.
And so...
I was invited to go and lead one of these seminars.
And so I was just delighted to have that opportunity.
And I'd gotten used to teaching the military because when I first came here, some of my classes were all cadets and never women.
Well, never women.
Initially, and then even after we began to admit women, rarely did I get women because the courses that I taught were supposed to be male courses.
I mean, for some reason.
So I didn't get many women.
But anyway, and in this World Affairs seminar, I was the only woman seminar leader.
But in any case, they sent for me.
I had to go to Ellington Air Force Base.
And they sent a T-39 to pick me up.
And the president of Texas Tech was also invited to go.
And so he and I were the only ones on this T-39, which was lots of fun for both of us.
Anyway, we flew in there.
And I got off the plane.
And here were these three colonels standing there.
and they were Aggie colonels.
The Aggie colonels found out that an Aggie professor was going to be there, and they had come to greet me.
Well, I will tell you that all the time that I was there, those Aggie colonels just treated me like I was royalty.
It was just...
It was a heartwarming experience.
They were so pleased to have a professor from their school and it was just, it was, I don't think I could have said anything that they would have disagreed with.
But anyway, it was just one of those wonderful moments when I suddenly realized that it didn't matter whether you were male or female.
You were an Aggie, and they were going to support you.
And it was just, as I say, a very warm and comforting experience, especially since I was the only woman there.
As you recall,
What was your first impression of A&M student capability when you gave tests those first years here compared to what you had, the level of ability you had known at Whittier and at Fullerton?
Not as good.
Not as good?
Not as good here?
Not as good here, no.
Okay, all right.
No.
When did that begin to change?
I think it took about six or eight years before that began to change.
Because I'm assuming that you didn't change your standards.
No, I didn't, but I found that
It was hard to have them do all the reading that they required to do.
And, but I think that's still the case.
But I think that maybe TV may be to blame for that now.
As you look back on those first few, two or three years for you as a newcomer here, what did the institution do right for this, to get this newcomer here?
And instead of asking what did the institution do wrong, what else could it have done, should it have done for a new faculty member?
I don't know how to.
I just remember how lonely it was.
and how I didn't have anybody to talk to about my research to say nothing of anything else.
But I missed that a lot.
But of course, I hadn't had a lot of it elsewhere either.
So it was just a continuation of something that I found that whatever
whatever sharing of research interests was outside of the university.
I didn't think there was a lot of emphasis on research.
I thought the emphasis was primarily on teaching.
And it was a, and I was very quiet about the way that I taught because I knew that I was teaching very differently
And...
And I would even ask students like, what do you think are the most important questions that ought to be asked on an exam?
Well, that was, I don't think Professor Nance liked that at all, because he thought that the students were telling me what questions I needed to ask on the exam, which was not the point at all.
The point was, I wanted to see whether or not they appreciated what were the most important aspects of the material that we were discussing together.
I always used the discussion approach.
Now, did he ever give you any feedback on those tests you turned in, the textbook proposals or anything?
Did he ever?
I think I told you about the one time that his son,
Joe Nance was in my class.
And I always, I had the students do a lot of outside reading.
And I always had essay questions on the reading.
Not just on the lectures, but on the outside reading.
So Joe came into class.
And Joe was a bright enough kid.
And he failed the first exam.
And first of all, I was terrified that he had to be in my class.
I wished there was some way I could get him out, because I knew that I did a lot of things that Professor Nance probably wouldn't approve of.
And so I thought when he failed the first exam.
And he failed the first exam because he obviously had not done the outside reading.
And so I'm just waiting for the ax to fall.
I'm walking down the hall.
Professor Nance stops me and he says, Mrs. Unterberger.
He always called me Mrs. Unterberger.
Everyone else in the whole department was always doctor, but I was always Mrs. Until one day I went in and I told him.
I said,
You know, you didn't hire me because I'm married.
You hired me because I had a PhD.
You call everybody else in this department doctor except me.
Would you kindly remember that I am as qualified in this department?
They're all married, too.
And so... What was his reaction?
He called me doctor after that.
But I was sort of getting up to here with this sense of being discriminated against.
For whatever reason, it didn't matter.
It seemed to me that he ought to recognize that.
And then the students would do the same thing then.
Everybody else would be doctor and I would be missus.
So I used to go into class and I didn't give a hoot about whether I had the title or not.
I knew.
But I'd go into class and on the board I would write.
Dr. Betty Unterberger.
So they would get the point that women were doctors and professors as well as men.
And that was the one thing I did too.
But anyway, so Milton stopped me in the hall and I thought, uh-oh.
And he said, Mrs. Unterberger, I just want to thank you for failing Joe in the exam.
believe it, he said he did not do the work and he needed to learn that you can't get by without doing the reading and you taught him that lesson.
Well I will tell you my opinion of Professor Nance went way up and Joe always did the reading after that so he learned his lesson.
But that was one of the happier experiences in the whole process of teaching here.
What if departments had a policy of selecting a comparative senior person to be a friend for every new faculty member?
If I'm a newcomer that here is a faculty member who's a veteran here, who would be my friend, my introducer, my advisor?
Well, you know, that's one of the things that the Women's Faculty Network does now for women.
That is, I have, I'm a mentor, a faculty.
I'm just, and I, and so they assign me a new woman.
who just has someone that they can talk to about.
In the department?
No, no, not necessarily.
No, it can be in the department.
But in this case, we don't have any new women.
And so I was assigned to someone in modern languages.
So, yes, I think that's wonderful.
I do.
I think that's a great help.
I would think that would be valuable anyway.
Yes, yes.
I would think so, and also not just for women, but for everyone.
Everyone in a new institution needs to have someone who's going to just tell them the way things are and help them with any problems.
I'm having trouble with my parking space.
Yes.
I can't get something to work.
What do you do with this piece of red tape?
That sort of thing.
Let's see.
Oh, I have to tell you another Aggie.
This is a great Aggie story.
I had a couple of students when I first came here.
One was in, he was the second command in the band, and he took my course in the Far East.
And he had a lot of the attitudes that a lot of the Corps people had then.
They were not very, they were, they didn't hold views
about minorities or Asians, who are also minorities.
And so I'll never forget, he came into class, and it was a class in East Asia.
And I asked him, I always ask him, what are you taking this course for?
I mean, why would you want to take a course in East Asia?
And I remember, I want to know something about the people I'm going to kill.
And this is another illustration of how you can't ever judge the capacity of people to learn or to change or to gain understanding.
I had learned that early on with Mr. Hughes.
And so I don't, I just accept initially.
And I let them, through the material and the teaching, learning experience with their own discovery, decide whether or not they want to change their views or not.
Well, it happened with this young man.
he became fascinated with the coursework.
And he changed.
And he'd come and he'd ask me for additional readings.
And I'd give him additional readings.
And then he'd come and he'd talk to me about the additional readings.
And it was a wonderful experience of seeing a student just go through a process of discovery that you never would have thought possible.
This was early on in my career.
Now, was this by chance still during Vietnam days?
Yes, yes, yes.
And he thought that he was going to go to Vietnam, as a lot of the military personnel did at that time.
Well, anyway.
But it was through him.
And then another member of the band, whom I had in class, and who also was someone who just didn't know anything about the rest of the world.
Their whole world was wrapped up in East Texas.
But anyway, these two guys, they went out.
They did serve in the war.
And then afterwards, they had both become so interested in international things, which they had learned in my class.
So they went, they traveled all over the world.
And in every place they went, they'd live and work and so on, et cetera.
Well, they both ended up, as it turned out, and they wrote to me.
I have letters that you wouldn't believe, Haskell, from students from all over the world.
And they've written, they told me what it's like and what they've learned.
And not just from Vietnam, but also even from the Gulf War.
I have another story to tell you about that.
But anyway, so some years, oh, I guess it was in,
These two men were in Switzerland, and they both had excellent jobs.
They were doing very, very well.
And it was at that point in Europe that they began thinking American football was a good thing.
These guys were gung-ho Aggie football fans.
And so when they found out, they were in Bern, Switzerland.
And since I had been writing to them, they had written to me.
They had told me wonderful stories about their adventures everywhere.
And so they decided that they were going to help to organize a Bern, Switzerland,
And how are they going to do it?
They're going to do it with help from the Aggies.
So they wrote to me and they said, I was on the athletic council at the time.
They wrote to me and they said, how can we get some Aggie, maybe an Aggie football player to come over and coach us?
Or how can we get this started?
And so I said, well, I would look into it.
So I talked to them.
I talked to Slocum, and he made some suggestions about persons whom he thought would be willing to go.
And so we had an Aggie football player that went over to coach the Burn Grizzlies.
Then, these two Aggies taught the burned grizzlies the Aggie fight songs, all the Aggie cheers and in German.
I could just say.
in German.
Anyway, so then we had an Aggie football player that went over regularly.
I helped them to get some of the used football equipment over here.
But anyhow, we worked out this deal.
So season after season, they would get help from Slocum and the
the Aggies and the coaches and so on.
And so then they were getting pretty good.
And these guys were helping to coach and teaching them and giving them that good old Aggie spirit.
And the Byrne Grizzlies won the European Championship.
And so they sent me a big
a document, a certificate, and I was made honorary coach of the Byrne Grizzlies.
But it was a story that I just loved.
There was all kinds of news about it in the Bern Grizzly, in the Bern papers and here and so on.
But it was just such fun.
And I thought, here are those Aggies.
Of course, they arranged Aggie muster and everything in Switzerland.
But it was just another illustration of that Aggie spirit and the way it got transferred to the Bern Grizzlies so that all the Bern Grizzlies knew about Texas A&M.
When you got here there were, women had been officially admitted but there weren't many women enrolled yet because they couldn't live in the dorms and they had to be a dependent of an employee or a student and so forth.
As the coeds began to grow in number, how did things change in your classes?
How did the atmosphere?
I had so few women.
And when they came into class, they didn't open their mouths.
So one of the big challenges that I faced was how to get the women involved.
Share with how did you do that?
Yes.
And so I made it a point to get to know the women especially.
And they would tell me that they were afraid to speak up.
And besides which, women aren't supposed to be smart.
They're not supposed to be smart, and they're not supposed to compete with the men.
And they came from backgrounds where that was the appropriate mode of behavior.
And so if they'd come and talk to me about what they want to do, it was always not, for instance, well, I love medicine, but I'm going to be a nurse.
Why not a doctor?
Oh, no, no way that they could think of being a doctor, et cetera.
I'm a medical mentor now for the same reason that I started to work with the women on campus.
And so I began, so I would talk to them about the possibilities that were available to them and that they shouldn't shortchange themselves, that, you know, I have this view that
We are all given great gifts and talents and abilities, and those are gifts from the divine.
And our gift in return is to realize those potentials.
That's the way we show our gratitude, is to use what we have been given.
And so I would talk, never in a religious way, but just in a way that would help them to realize that one of our responsibilities in life is to give back what has been given to us.
and not to shortchange themselves.
And so I would talk to them about that, and then in class to help them.
I would say things like, I'm going to raise a question about this or that, and I hope that you'll respond, because I think if you respond the first time, you will get over that fear.
I've always discovered that the first time
that you speak in a situation that seems to be forbidding, that you break the ice and it's a lot easier the second time.
So I would do that.
I would work on that.
And if there were men in the class that had that problem, I would do the same thing for them.
It wasn't just for women, but it was more often for women because culturally and socially they had been raised to be quiet, to sit back.
to look for something less competitive, etc.
So I worked on that.
But I think that for a lot of the women, as for me, and this was true, I only had one woman professor in all of my education.
But it so happened that she was first-rate.
She was at Syracuse University and she taught citizenship.
She taught political science, and I'll never forget what it meant to me to go into a class.
She was a dynamic teacher.
In fact, they've just named a seminar, a wing of the building after it's Syracuse.
In fact, when they built on this big, beautiful addition to the Maxwell School, they invited me back to dedicate it, and I had to give a lecture at that time.